235
We will not describe the splicing machinery in detail, but it is worthwhile 
to note that, unlike the other steps of mRNA production we have dis-
cussed, RNA splicing is carried out largely by RNA molecules rather than 
proteins. These RNA molecules, called small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs), 
are packaged with additional proteins to form small nuclear ribonucleo-
proteins (snRNPs, pronounced “snurps”). The snRNPs recognize splice-site 
sequences through complementary base-pairing between their RNA 
components and the sequences in the pre-mRNA, and they also partici-
pate intimately in the chemistry of splicing (Figure 7–21). Together, these 
snRNPs form the core of the spliceosome, the large assembly of RNA and 
protein molecules that carries out RNA splicing in the nucleus. To watch 
the spliceosome in action, see Movie 7.5.
The intron–exon type of gene arrangement in eukaryotes may, at first, 
seem wasteful. It does, however, have a number of important benefits. 
First, the transcripts of many eukaryotic genes can be spliced in differ-
ent ways, each of which can produce a distinct protein. Such alternative 
splicing thereby allows many different proteins to be produced from 
the same gene (Figure 7–22). About 95% of human genes are thought to 
undergo alternative splicing. Thus RNA splicing enables eukaryotes to 
increase the already enormous coding potential of their genomes.
RNA splicing also provides another advantage to eukaryotes, one that is 
likely to have been profoundly important in the early evolutionary history 
of genes. As we discuss in detail in Chapter 9, the intron–exon structure 
of genes is thought to have sped up the emergence of new and useful 
proteins: novel proteins appear to have arisen by the mixing and match-
ing of different exons of preexisting genes, much like the assembly of a 
new type of machine from a kit of preexisting functional components. 
Indeed, many proteins in present-day cells resemble patchworks com-
posed from a common set of protein pieces, called protein domains (see 
Figure 4–51).
– – – AG GURAGU – –     – –  YURAC – .... – YYYYYYYYNCAG G – – – 
– – – AG G – – – 
sequences required for intron removal
INTRON REMOVED
5′
3′
3′
5′
portion of
pre-mRNA
exon 1
exon 1
exon 2
exon 2
intron
portion of
spliced mRNA
OH 
3′
5′
3′
A 
OH 
A 
HO 
5′
3′
3′
+ 
lariat 
5′
exon 1 
intron sequence
exon 2 
2′
A 
portion of
pre-mRNA
portion of spliced
pre-mRNA
Figure 7–19 Special nucleotide sequences in a pre-mRNA transcript signal the 
beginning and the end of an intron. Only the nucleotide sequences shown are 
required to remove an intron; the other positions in an intron can be occupied by 
any nucleotide. The special sequences are recognized primarily by small nuclear 
ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), which direct the cleavage of the RNA at the intron–
exon borders and catalyze the covalent linkage of the exon sequences. Here, in 
addition to the standard symbols for nucleotides (A, C, G, U), R stands for either A 
or G; Y stands for either C or U; N stands for any nucleotide. The A shown in red 
forms the branch point of the lariat produced in the splicing reaction shown in Figure 
7–20. The distances along the RNA between the three splicing sequences are highly 
variable; however, the distance between the branch point and the 5′ splice junction is 
typically much longer than that between the 3′ splice junction and the branch point 
(see Figure 7–20). The splicing sequences shown are from humans; similar sequences 
direct RNA splicing in other eukaryotes.
Figure 7–20 An intron in a pre-mRNA 
molecule forms a branched structure 
during RNA splicing. In the first step, the 
branch point adenine (red A) in the intron 
sequence attacks the 5′ splice site and cuts 
the sugar–phosphate backbone of the RNA 
at this point (this is the same A highlighted 
in red in Figure 7–19). In this process, the 
cut 5′ end of the intron becomes covalently 
linked to the 2′-OH group of the ribose 
of the A nucleotide to form a branched 
structure. The free 3′-OH end of the exon 
sequence then reacts with the start of 
the next exon sequence, joining the two 
exons together into a continuous coding 
sequence and releasing the intron in the 
form of a lariat structure, which is eventually 
degraded in the nucleus. 
From DNA to RNA         
