231
• A third distinctive feature of transcription in eukaryotes is that the 
mechanisms that control its initiation are much more elaborate than 
those in prokaryotes—a point we discuss in detail in Chapter 8. In bac-
teria, genes tend to lie very close to one another in the DNA, with only 
very short lengths of nontranscribed DNA between them. But in plants 
and animals, including humans, individual genes are spread out along 
the DNA, with stretches of up to 100,000 nucleotide pairs between one 
gene and the next. This architecture allows a single gene to be con-
trolled by a large variety of regulatory DNA sequences scattered along 
the DNA, and it enables eukaryotes to engage in more complex forms 
of transcriptional regulation than do bacteria.
• Last but not least, eukaryotic transcription initiation must take into 
account the packing of DNA into nucleosomes and more compact 
forms of chromatin structure, as we describe in Chapter 8. 
We now turn to the general transcription factors and discuss how they 
help eukaryotic RNA polymerase II initiate transcription. 
Eukaryotic RNA Polymerase Requires General 
Transcription Factors
The initial finding that, unlike bacterial RNA polymerase, purified eukary-
otic RNA polymerase II could not initiate transcription on its own in a 
test tube led to the discovery and purification of the general transcrip-
tion factors. These accessory proteins assemble on the promoter, where 
they position the RNA polymerase and pull apart the DNA double helix 
to expose the template strand, allowing the polymerase to begin tran-
scription. Thus the general transcription factors have a similar role in 
eukaryotic transcription as sigma factor has in bacterial transcription.
Figure 7–12 shows how the general transcription factors assemble at 
a promoter used by RNA polymerase II. The assembly process typically 
begins with the binding of the general transcription factor TFIID to a short 
Table 7–2 The Three RNA Polymerases in Eukaryotic Cells
Type of Polymerase
Genes Transcribed
RNA polymerase I
most rRNA genes
RNA polymerase II
all protein-coding genes, miRNA genes, plus 
genes for other noncoding RNAs (e.g., those in 
spliceosomes)
RNA polymerase III
tRNA genes 
5S rRNA gene 
genes for many other small RNAs
Figure 7–12 To begin transcription, eukaryotic RNA polymerase II 
requires a set of general transcription factors. These transcription 
factors are called TFIIB, TFIID, and so on. (A) Many eukaryotic 
promoters contain a DNA sequence called the TATA box. (B) The 
TATA box is recognized by a subunit of the general transcription factor 
TFIID, called the TATA-binding protein (TBP). For simplicity, the DNA 
distortion produced by the binding of the TBP (see Figure 7–13) is 
not shown. (C) The binding of TFIID enables the adjacent binding of 
TFIIB. (D) The rest of the general transcription factors, as well as the 
RNA polymerase itself, assemble at the promoter. (E) TFIIH then pries 
apart the double helix at the transcription start point, using the energy 
of ATP hydrolysis, which exposes the template strand of the gene (not 
shown). TFIIH also phosphorylates RNA polymerase II, releasing the 
polymerase from most of the general transcription factors, so it can 
begin transcription. The site of phosphorylation is a long polypeptide 
“tail” that extends from the polymerase. 
From DNA to RNA         
Question 7–3
Could the RNA polymerase used 
for transcription be used as the 
polymerase that makes the RNA 
primer required for DNA replication 
(discussed in Chapter 6)?
TATA box
TFIID
TBP
start of transcription
TFIIB
TFIIE
TFIIF
RNA polymerase II
TRANSCRIPTION
TFIIH
other factors
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
ribonucleoside
triphosphates
(UTP, ATP, CTP, GTP)
RNA
DNA
P
P
