240
By the beginning of the 1960s, the central dogma had 
been accepted as the pathway along which informa-
tion flows from gene to protein. It was clear that genes 
encode proteins, that genes are made of DNA, and that 
mRNA serves as an intermediary, carrying the infor-
mation from DNA to the ribosome, where the RNA is 
translated into protein. 
Even the general format of the genetic code had been 
worked out: each of the 20 amino acids found in pro-
teins is represented by a triplet codon in an mRNA 
molecule. But an even greater challenge remained: 
biologists, chemists, and even physicists set their sights 
on breaking the genetic code—attempting to figure out 
which amino acid each of the 64 possible nucleotide tri-
plets designates. The most straightforward path to the 
solution would have been to compare the sequence of 
a segment of DNA or of mRNA with its corresponding 
polypeptide product. Techniques for sequencing nucleic 
acids, however, would not be devised for another 10 
years. 
So researchers decided that, to crack the genetic code, 
they would have to synthesize their own simple RNA 
molecules. If they could feed these RNA molecules to 
ribosomes—the machines that make proteins—and 
then analyze the resulting polypeptide product, they 
would be on their way to deciphering which triplets 
encode which amino acids.
Losing the cells
Before researchers could test their synthetic mRNAs, 
they needed to perfect a cell-free system for protein 
synthesis. This would allow them to translate their 
messages into polypeptides in a test tube. (Generally 
speaking, when working in the laboratory, the simpler 
the system, the easier it is to interpret the results.) To 
isolate the molecular machinery they needed for such 
a cell-free translation system, researchers broke open 
E. coli cells and loaded their contents into a centrifuge 
tube. Spinning these samples at high speed caused the 
membranes and other large chunks of cellular debris to 
be dragged to the bottom of the tube; the lighter cellular 
components required for protein synthesis—including 
mRNA, the tRNA adaptors, ribosomes, enzymes, and 
other small molecules—were left floating in the superna-
tant. Researchers found that simply adding radioactive 
amino acids to this cell “soup” would trigger the produc-
tion of radiolabeled polypeptides. By centrifuging this 
supernatant again, at a higher speed, the researchers 
could force the ribosomes, and any newly synthesized 
peptides attached to them, to the bottom of the tube; the 
labeled polypeptides could then be detected by measur-
ing the radioactivity in the sediment remaining in the 
tube after the top layer had been discarded.
The trouble with this particular system was that it 
produced proteins encoded by the cell’s own mRNAs 
already present in the extract. But researchers wanted 
to use their own synthetic messages to direct protein 
synthesis. This problem was solved when Marshall 
Nirenberg discovered that he could destroy the cells’ 
mRNA in the extract by adding a small amount of ribo-
nuclease—an enzyme that degrades RNA—to the mix. 
Now all he needed to do was prepare large quantities of 
synthetic mRNA, add it to the cell-free system, and see 
what peptides came out.
Faking the message
Producing a synthetic polynucleotide with a defined 
sequence was not as simple as it sounds. Again, it 
would be years before chemists and bioengineers devel-
oped machines that could synthesize any given string 
of nucleic acids quickly and cheaply. Nirenberg decided 
to use polynucleotide phosphorylase, an enzyme that 
would join ribonucleotides together in the absence of a 
template. The sequence of the resulting RNA would then 
depend entirely on which nucleotides were presented 
to the enzyme. A mixture of nucleotides would be sewn 
into a random sequence; but a single type of nucleotide 
would yield a homogeneous polymer containing only 
that one nucleotide. Thus Nirenberg, working with his 
collaborator Heinrich Matthaei, first produced synthetic 
mRNAs made entirely of uracil—poly U.
Together, the researchers fed this poly U to their cell-
free translation system. They then added a single type 
of radioactively labeled amino acid to the mix. After 
testing each amino acid—one at a time, in 20 differ-
ent experiments—they determined that poly U directs 
the synthesis of a polypeptide containing only phenyl-
alanine (Figure 7–27). With this electrifying result, the 
first word in the genetic code had been deciphered (see 
Figure 7–25). 
Nirenberg and Matthaei then repeated the experiment 
with poly A and poly C and determined that AAA codes 
for lysine and CCC for proline. The meaning of poly G 
could not be ascertained by this method because this 
polynucleotide forms an odd triple-stranded helix that 
did not serve as a template in the cell-free system.
Feeding ribosomes with synthetic RNA seemed a 
fruitful technique. But with the single-nucleotide pos-
sibilities exhausted, researchers had nailed down only 
three codons; they had 61 still to go. The other codons, 
however, were harder to decipher, and a new synthetic 
approach was needed. In the 1950s, the organic chem-
ist Gobind Khorana had been developing methods for 
preparing mixed polynucleotides of defined sequence—
but his techniques worked only for DNA. When he 
CRACKING THE GENETIC CODE
How we Know
