244	
Chapter 7     From DNA to Protein: How Cells Read the Genome
The synthetase-catalyzed reaction that attaches the amino acid to the 3′ 
end of the tRNA is one of many reactions in cells coupled to the energy-
releasing hydrolysis of ATP (see Figure 3–33). The reaction produces a 
high-energy bond between the charged tRNA and the amino acid. The 
energy of this bond is later used to link the amino acid covalently to the 
growing polypeptide chain. 
The mRNA Message Is Decoded by Ribosomes
The recognition of a codon by the anticodon on a tRNA molecule depends 
on the same type of complementary base-pairing used in DNA replication 
and transcription. However, accurate and rapid translation of mRNA into 
protein requires a molecular machine that can move along the mRNA, 
capture complementary tRNA molecules, hold the tRNAs in position, and 
then covalently link the amino acids that they carry to form a polypeptide 
chain. In both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, the machine that gets the job 
done is the ribosome—a large complex made from dozens of small pro-
teins (the ribosomal proteins) and several crucial RNA molecules called 
ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs). A typical eukaryotic cell contains millions of 
ribosomes in its cytoplasm (Figure 7–31). 
Eukaryotic and prokaryotic ribosomes are very similar in structure and 
function. Both are composed of one large subunit and one small subunit, 
which fit together to form a complete ribosome with a mass of several 
million daltons (Figure 7–32); for comparison, an average-sized pro-
tein has a mass of 30,000 daltons. The small ribosomal subunit matches 
the tRNAs to the codons of the mRNA, while the large subunit catalyzes 
the formation of the peptide bonds that covalently link the amino acids 
together into a polypeptide chain. These two subunits come together on 
an mRNA molecule near its 5′ end to start the synthesis of a protein. The 
mRNA is then pulled through the ribosome like a long piece of tape. As 
the mRNA inches forward in a 5′-to-3′ direction, the ribosome translates 
its nucleotide sequence into an amino acid sequence, one codon at a 
time, using the tRNAs as adaptors. Each amino acid is thereby added in 
the correct sequence to the end of the growing polypeptide chain (Movie 
7.7). When synthesis of the protein is finished, the two subunits of the 
ribosome separate. Ribosomes operate with remarkable efficiency: a 
eukaryotic ribosome adds about 2 amino acids to a polypeptide chain 
each second; a bacterial ribosome operates even faster, adding about 20 
amino acids per second.
400 nm
endoplasmic reticulum
cytosol
Figure 7–31 Ribosomes are located in 
the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells. This 
electron micrograph shows a thin section of 
a small region of cytoplasm. The ribosomes 
appear as small gray blobs. Some are free in 
the cytosol (red arrows); others are attached 
to membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum 
(green arrows). (Courtesy of George Palade.) 
Question 7–4
In a clever experiment performed in 
1962, a cysteine already attached to 
its tRNA was chemically converted 
to an alanine. These “hybrid” tRNA 
molecules were then added to a cell-
free translation system from which 
the normal cysteine-tRNAs had 
been removed. When the resulting 
protein was analyzed, it was found 
that alanine had been inserted at 
every point in the polypeptide chain 
where cysteine was supposed to be. 
Discuss what this experiment tells 
you about the role of aminoacyl-
tRNA synthetases during the normal 
translation of the genetic code.
