257
ribosomes; and transfer RNAs (tRNAs), which act as adaptor mol-
ecules in protein synthesis. 
• 
To begin transcription, RNA polymerase binds to specific DNA sites 
called promoters that lie immediately upstream of genes. To initiate 
transcription, eukaryotic RNA polymerases require the assembly of 
a complex of general transcription factors at the promoter, whereas 
bacterial RNA polymerase requires only an additional subunit, called 
sigma factor. 
• 
Most protein-coding genes in eukaryotic cells are composed of a 
number of coding regions, called exons, interspersed with larger 
noncoding regions, called introns. When a eukaryotic gene is tran-
scribed from DNA into RNA, both the exons and introns are copied. 
• 
Introns are removed from the RNA transcripts in the nucleus by RNA 
splicing, a reaction catalyzed by small ribonucleoprotein complexes 
known as snRNPs. Splicing removes the introns from the RNA and 
joins together the exons—often in a variety of combinations, allowing 
multiple proteins to be produced from the same gene. 
• 
Eukaryotic pre-mRNAs go through several additional RNA process-
ing steps before they leave the nucleus as mRNAs, including 5′ RNA 
capping and 3′ polyadenylation. These reactions, along with splicing, 
take place as the pre-mRNA is being transcribed. 
• 
Translation of the nucleotide sequence of an mRNA into a protein 
takes place in the cytoplasm on large ribonucleoprotein assemblies 
called ribosomes. As the mRNA moves through the ribosome, its 
message is translated into protein.
• 
The nucleotide sequence in mRNA is read in sets of three nucleotides 
called codons; each codon corresponds to one amino acid. 
• 
The correspondence between amino acids and codons is specified 
by the genetic code. The possible combinations of the 4 different 
nucleotides in RNA give 64 different codons in the genetic code. Most 
amino acids are specified by more than one codon.
• 
tRNAs act as adaptor molecules in protein synthesis. Enzymes called 
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases covalently link amino acids to their 
appropriate tRNAs. Each tRNA contains a sequence of three nucle-
otides, the anticodon, which recognizes a codon in an mRNA through 
complementary base-pairing.
• 
Protein synthesis begins when a ribosome assembles at an initia-
tion codon (AUG) in an mRNA molecule, a process that depends on 
proteins called translation initiation factors. The completed protein 
chain is released from the ribosome when a stop codon (UAA, UAG, 
or UGA) in the mRNA is reached.
• 
The stepwise linking of amino acids into a polypeptide chain is cata-
lyzed by an rRNA molecule in the large ribosomal subunit, which thus 
acts as a ribozyme.
• 
The concentration of a protein in a cell depends on the rate at 
which the mRNA and protein are synthesized and degraded. Protein 
degradation in the cytosol and nucleus occurs inside large protein 
complexes called proteasomes. 
• 
From our knowledge of present-day organisms and the molecules 
they contain, it seems likely that life on Earth began with the evolu-
tion of RNA molecules that could catalyze their own replication. 
• 
It has been proposed that RNA served as both the genome and the 
catalysts in the first cells, before DNA replaced RNA as a more stable 
molecule for storing genetic information, and proteins replaced RNAs 
as the major catalytic and structural components. RNA catalysts in 
modern cells are thought to provide a glimpse into an ancient, RNA-
based world.
Essential Concepts         
