251
act by cutting (hydrolyzing) the peptide bonds between amino acids (see 
Panel 2–5, pp. 74–75). One function of proteolytic pathways is to rap-
idly degrade those proteins whose lifetimes must be kept short. Another 
is to recognize and remove proteins that are damaged or misfolded. 
Eliminating improperly folded proteins is critical for an organism, as mis-
folded proteins tend to aggregate, and protein aggregates can damage 
cells and even trigger cell death. Eventually, all proteins—even long-lived 
ones—accumulate damage and are degraded by proteolysis.
In eukaryotic cells, proteins are broken down by large protein machines 
called proteasomes, present in both the cytosol and the nucleus. A pro-
teasome contains a central cylinder formed from proteases whose active 
sites face into an inner chamber. Each end of the cylinder is stoppered by 
a large protein complex formed from at least 10 types of protein subunits 
(Figure 7–40). These protein stoppers bind the proteins destined for deg-
radation and then—using ATP hydrolysis to fuel this activity—unfold the 
doomed proteins and thread them into the inner chamber of the cylinder. 
Once the proteins are inside, proteases chop them into short peptides, 
which are then jettisoned from either end of the proteasome. Housing 
proteases inside these molecular destruction chambers makes sense, as 
it prevents the enzymes from running rampant in the cell. 
How do proteasomes select which proteins in the cell should be degraded? 
In eukaryotes, proteasomes act primarily on proteins that have been 
marked for destruction by the covalent attachment of a small protein 
called ubiquitin. Specialized enzymes tag selected proteins with a short 
chain of ubiquitin molecules; these ubiquitylated proteins are then rec-
ognized, unfolded, and fed into proteasomes by proteins in the stopper 
(Figure 7–41).
(A)
(B)
central
cylinder
(proteases)
stopper
target protein with
polyubiquitin chain
active sites
UBIQUITIN
RECYCLED
PROTEIN
DEGRADED
Figure 7–40 A proteasome degrades 
short-lived and misfolded proteins. The 
structures shown were determined by X-ray 
crystallography. (A) A cut-away view of the 
central cylinder of the proteasome, with 
the active sites of the proteases indicated 
by red dots. (B) The structure of the entire 
proteasome, in which access to the central 
cylinder (yellow) is regulated by a stopper 
(blue) at each end. (B, adapted from P.C.A 
da Fonseca et al., Mol. Cell 46:54–66, 2012.)
Figure 7–41 Proteins marked by a 
polyubiquitin chain are degraded by the 
proteasome. Proteins in the stopper of a 
proteasome (blue) recognize target proteins 
marked by a specific type of polyubiquitin 
chain. The stopper then unfolds the target 
protein and threads it into the proteasome’s 
central cylinder (yellow), which is lined with 
proteases that chop the protein to pieces. 
From RNA to Protein         
