256	
Chapter 7     From DNA to Protein: How Cells Read the Genome
glucose and other simple carbohydrates, is readily formed from formal-
dehyde (HCHO), which is one of the principal products of experiments 
simulating conditions on the primitive Earth. The sugar deoxyribose is 
harder to make, and in present-day cells it is produced from ribose in 
a reaction catalyzed by a protein enzyme, suggesting that ribose pre-
dates deoxyribose in cells. Presumably, DNA appeared on the scene after 
RNA, and then proved more suited than RNA as a permanent repository 
of genetic information. In particular, the deoxyribose in its sugar–phos-
phate backbone makes chains of DNA chemically much more stable than 
chains of RNA, so that greater lengths of DNA can be maintained without 
breakage.
The other differences between RNA and DNA—the double-helical struc-
ture of DNA and the use of thymine rather than uracil—further enhance 
DNA stability by making the molecule easier to repair. We saw in Chapter 
6 that a damaged nucleotide on one strand of the double helix can be 
repaired by using the other strand as a template. Furthermore, deamina-
tion, one of the most common unwanted chemical changes occurring in 
polynucleotides, is easier to detect and repair in DNA than in RNA (see 
Figure 6–23). This is because the product of the deamination of cytosine 
is, by chance, uracil, which already exists in RNA, so that such damage 
would be impossible for repair enzymes to detect in an RNA molecule. 
However, in DNA, which has thymine rather than uracil, any uracil pro-
duced by the accidental deamination of cytosine is easily detected and 
repaired.
Taken together, the evidence we have discussed supports the idea that 
RNA—with its ability to provide genetic, structural, and catalytic func-
tions—preceded DNA in evolution. As cells more closely resembling 
present-day cells appeared, it is believed that many of the functions orig-
inally performed by RNA were taken over by DNA and proteins: DNA 
took over the primary genetic function, and proteins became the major 
catalysts, while RNA remained primarily as the intermediary connecting 
the two (Figure 7–48). With the advent of DNA, cells were able to become 
more complex, for they could then carry and transmit more genetic 
information than could be stably maintained by RNA alone. Because of 
the greater chemical complexity of proteins and the variety of chemi-
cal reactions they can catalyze, the shift (albeit incomplete) from RNA 
to proteins also provided a much richer source of structural components 
and enzymes. This enabled cells to evolve the great diversity of structure 
and function that we see in life today.
Essential Concepts
• 
The flow of genetic information in all living cells is DNA → RNA → 
protein. The conversion of the genetic instructions in DNA into RNAs 
and proteins is termed gene expression.
• 
To express the genetic information carried in DNA, the nucleotide 
sequence of a gene is first transcribed into RNA. Transcription is 
catalyzed by the enzyme RNA polymerase, which uses nucleotide 
sequences in the DNA molecule to determine which strand to use as 
a template, and where to start and stop transcribing.
• 
RNA differs in several respects from DNA. It contains the sugar ribose 
instead of deoxyribose and the base uracil (U) instead of thymine (T). 
RNAs in cells are synthesized as single-stranded molecules, which 
often fold up into complex three-dimensional shapes. 
• 
Cells make several functional types of RNAs, including messenger 
RNAs (mRNAs), which carry the instructions for making proteins; 
ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs), which are the crucial components of 
RNA-based systems 
RNA
DNA
EVOLUTION OF RNAs THAT
CAN DIRECT PROTEIN SYNTHESIS
RNA- and protein-based systems
EVOLUTION OF NEW ENZYMES
THAT SYNTHESIZE DNA AND
MAKE RNA COPIES FROM IT
present-day cells
RNA
RNA
protein
protein
Figure 7–48 RNA may have preceded 
DNA and proteins in evolution. According 
to this hypothesis, RNA molecules provided 
genetic, structural, and catalytic functions in 
the earliest cells. DNA is now the repository 
of genetic information, and proteins carry 
out almost all catalysis in cells. RNA now 
functions mainly as a go-between in protein 
synthesis, while remaining a catalyst for 
a few crucial reactions (including protein 
synthesis).
Question 7–6
Discuss the following: “During the 
evolution of life on Earth, RNA lost 
its glorious position as the first self-
replicating catalyst. Its role now is as 
a mere messenger in the information 
flow from DNA to protein.”
