234	
Chapter 7     From DNA to Protein: How Cells Read the Genome
exons—are usually shorter than the introns, and they often represent 
only a small fraction of the total length of the gene (Figure 7–17). Introns 
range in length from a single nucleotide to more than 10,000 nucleotides. 
Some protein-coding eukaryotic genes lack introns altogether, and some 
have only a few; but most have many (Figure 7–18). Note that the terms 
“exon” and “intron” apply to both the DNA and the corresponding RNA 
sequences. 
Introns Are Removed From Pre-mRNAs by RNA Splicing
To produce an mRNA in a eukaryotic cell, the entire length of the gene, 
introns as well as exons, is transcribed into RNA. After capping, and as 
RNA polymerase II continues to transcribe the gene, the process of RNA 
splicing begins, in which the introns are removed from the newly synthe-
sized RNA and the exons are stitched together. Each transcript ultimately 
receives a poly-A tail; in some cases, this happens after splicing, whereas 
in other cases, it occurs before the final splicing reactions have been 
completed. Once a transcript has been spliced and its 5′ and 3′ ends have 
been modified, the RNA is now a functional mRNA molecule that can 
leave the nucleus and be translated into protein.
How does the cell determine which parts of the RNA transcript to remove 
during splicing? Unlike the coding sequence of an exon, most of the 
nucleotide sequence of an intron is unimportant. Although there is lit-
tle overall resemblance between the nucleotide sequences of different 
introns, each intron contains a few short nucleotide sequences that act 
as cues for its removal from the pre-mRNA. These special sequences are 
found at or near each end of the intron and are the same or very similar in 
all introns (Figure 7–19). Guided by these sequences, an elaborate splic-
ing machine cuts out the intron in the form of a “lariat” structure (Figure 
7–20), formed by the reaction of the “A” nucleotide highlighted in red in 
Figures 7–19 and 7–20.
5′
3′
5′
3′
3′
5′
DNA
3′
5′
DNA
bacterial gene
eukaryotic gene
coding region
coding regions
(exons)
noncoding regions
(introns)
human β-globin gene
1 2 3
2000
nucleotide pairs
human Factor VIII gene
exons
200,000 nucleotide pairs
1
5
10
14
22
25
26
(A)
(B)
introns
DNA
Figure 7–17 Eukaryotic and bacterial genes are organized differently. A bacterial 
gene consists of a single stretch of uninterrupted nucleotide sequence that encodes 
the amino acid sequence of a protein (or more than one protein). In contrast, the 
protein-coding sequences of most eukaryotic genes (exons) are interrupted by 
noncoding sequences (introns). Promoters for transcription are indicated in green.
Figure 7–18 Most protein-
coding human genes are 
broken into multiple exons 
and introns. (A) The β-globin 
gene, which encodes one of 
the subunits of the oxygen-
carrying protein hemoglobin, 
contains 3 exons. (B) The 
Factor VIII gene, which 
encodes a protein (Factor VIII) 
that functions in the blood-
clotting pathway, contains 26 
exons. Mutations in this large 
gene are responsible for the 
most prevalent form of the 
blood disorder hemophilia. 
