250	
Chapter 7     From DNA to Protein: How Cells Read the Genome
have seen that there are some subtle differences in the way that bac-
teria and eukaryotes synthesize RNA and proteins. Through a quirk of 
evolution, these differences form the basis of one of the most important 
advances in modern medicine.
Many of our most effective antibiotics are compounds that act by inhib-
iting bacterial, but not eukaryotic, RNA and protein synthesis. Some 
of these drugs exploit the small structural and functional differences 
between bacterial and eukaryotic ribosomes, so that they interfere pref-
erentially with bacterial protein synthesis. These compounds can thus 
be taken in doses high enough to kill bacteria without being toxic to 
humans. Because different antibiotics bind to different regions of the 
bacterial ribosome, these drugs often inhibit different steps in protein 
synthesis. A few of the antibiotics that inhibit bacterial RNA and protein 
synthesis are listed in Table 7–3. 
Many common antibiotics were first isolated from fungi. Fungi and bacte-
ria often occupy the same ecological niches; to gain a competitive edge, 
fungi have evolved, over time, potent toxins that kill bacteria but are 
harmless to themselves. Because fungi and humans are both eukaryotes, 
and are thus more closely related to each other than either is to bacteria 
(see Figure 1–28), we have been able to borrow these weapons to combat 
our own bacterial foes.
Controlled Protein Breakdown Helps Regulate the Amount 
of Each Protein in a Cell
After a protein is released from the ribosome, a cell can control its activ-
ity and longevity in various ways. The number of copies of a protein in 
a cell depends, like the human population, not only on how quickly new 
individuals are made but also on how long they survive. So controlling 
the breakdown of proteins into their constituent amino acids helps cells 
regulate the amount of each particular protein. Proteins vary enormously 
in their life-span. Structural proteins that become part of a relatively sta-
ble tissue such as bone or muscle may last for months or even years, 
whereas other proteins, such as metabolic enzymes and those that regu-
late cell growth and division (discussed in Chapter 18), last only for days, 
hours, or even seconds. How does the cell control these lifetimes?
Cells possess specialized pathways that enzymatically break proteins 
down into their constituent amino acids (a process termed proteolysis). 
The enzymes that degrade proteins, first to short peptides and finally to 
individual amino acids, are known collectively as proteases. Proteases 
Table 7–3 Antibiotics that Inhibit BACTERIAL Protein or RNA 
Synthesis
Antibiotic
Specific Effect
Tetracycline
blocks binding of aminoacyl-tRNA to A site of ribosome 
(step 1 in Figure 7–34)
Streptomycin
prevents the transition from initiation complex to chain 
elongation (see Figure 7–36); also causes miscoding
Chloramphenicol
blocks the peptidyl transferase reaction on ribosomes  
(step 2 in Figure 7–34)
Cycloheximide
blocks the translocation reaction on ribosomes (step 3 in 
Figure 7–34)
Rifamycin
blocks initiation of transcription by binding to RNA 
polymerase
