238	
Chapter 7     From DNA to Protein: How Cells Read the Genome
large fraction of the RNA it synthesizes without ever using it. According 
to one school of thought, early cells—the common ancestors of prokary-
otes and eukaryotes—contained introns that were lost in prokaryotes 
during subsequent evolution. By shedding their introns and adopting a 
smaller, more streamlined genome, prokaryotes would have been able to 
reproduce more rapidly and efficiently. Consistent with this idea, simple 
eukaryotes that reproduce rapidly (some yeasts, for example) have rela-
tively few introns, and these introns are usually much shorter than those 
found in higher eukaryotes. 
On the other hand, some argue that introns were originally parasitic 
mobile genetic elements (discussed in Chapter 9) that happened to 
invade an early eukaryotic ancestor, colonizing its genome. These host 
cells then unwittingly replicated the “stowaway” nucleotide sequences 
along with their own DNA; modern eukaryotes simply never bothered 
to sweep away the genetic clutter left from that ancient infection. The 
issue, however, is far from settled; whether introns evolved early—and 
were lost in prokaryotes—or evolved later in eukaryotes is still a topic of 
scientific debate, and we return to it in Chapter 9.
From RNA to Protein
By the end of the 1950s, biologists had demonstrated that the informa-
tion encoded in DNA is copied first into RNA and then into protein. The 
debate then shifted to the “coding problem”: How is the information in 
a linear sequence of nucleotides in an RNA molecule translated into the 
linear sequence of a chemically quite different set of subunits—the amino 
acids in a protein? This fascinating question intrigued scientists at the 
time. Here was a cryptogram set up by nature that, after more than 3 
billion years of evolution, could finally be solved by one of the products 
of evolution—human beings! Indeed, scientists have not only cracked 
the code but have revealed, in atomic detail, the precise workings of the 
machinery by which cells read this code.
AAAA
AAAA
CYTOPLASM
NUCLEUS
pre-mRNA
DNA
introns
exons
TRANSCRIPTION
TRANSLATION
EXPORT
5′ CAPPING
RNA SPLICING
3′ POLYADENYLATION
mRNA
mRNA
protein
EUKARYOTES
(A)
PROKARYOTES
(B)
DNA
TRANSCRIPTION
TRANSLATION
mRNA
protein
RNA cap
Figure 7–24 Prokaryotes and eukaryotes 
handle their RNA transcripts differently. 
(A) In eukaryotic cells, the pre-mRNA 
molecule produced by transcription 
contains both intron and exon sequences. 
Its two ends are modified, and the introns 
are removed by RNA splicing. The resulting 
mRNA is then transported from the nucleus 
to the cytoplasm, where it is translated into 
protein. Although these steps are depicted 
as occurring in sequence, one at a time, 
in reality they occur simultaneously. For 
example, the RNA cap is usually added and 
splicing usually begins before transcription 
has been completed. Because of this 
overlap, transcripts of the entire gene 
(including all introns and exons) do not 
typically exist in the cell. (B) In prokaryotes, 
the production of mRNA molecules 
is simpler. The 5′ end of an mRNA 
molecule is produced by the initiation of 
transcription by RNA polymerase, and the 
3′ end is produced by the termination of 
transcription. Because prokaryotic cells 
lack a nucleus, transcription and translation 
take place in a common compartment. 
Translation of a bacterial mRNA can 
therefore begin before its synthesis has 
been completed. In both eukaryotes and 
prokaryotes, the amount of a protein in a 
cell depends on the rates of each of these 
steps, as well as on the rates of degradation 
of the mRNA and protein molecules.
