249
We saw in Chapter 4 that many proteins can fold into their three-dimen-
sional shape spontaneously, and some do so as they are spun out of the 
ribosome. Most proteins, however, require chaperone proteins to help 
them fold correctly in the cell. Chaperones can “steer” proteins along pro-
ductive folding pathways and prevent them from aggregating inside the 
cell (see Figures 4–9 and 4–10). Newly synthesized proteins are typically 
met by their chaperones as they emerge from the ribosome.
Proteins Are Made on Polyribosomes
The synthesis of most protein molecules takes between 20 seconds and 
several minutes. But even during this short period, multiple ribosomes 
usually bind to each mRNA molecule being translated. If the mRNA is 
being translated efficiently, a new ribosome hops onto the 5′ end of the 
mRNA molecule almost as soon as the preceding ribosome has trans-
lated enough of the nucleotide sequence to move out of the way. The 
mRNA molecules being translated are therefore usually found in the form 
of polyribosomes, also known as polysomes. These large cytoplasmic 
assemblies are made up of many ribosomes spaced as close as 80 nucle-
otides apart along a single mRNA molecule (Figure 7–39). With multiple 
ribosomes working simultaneously on a single mRNA, many more pro-
tein molecules can be made in a given time than would be possible if 
each polypeptide had to be completed before the next could be started.
Polysomes operate in both bacteria and eukaryotes, but bacteria can 
speed up the rate of protein synthesis even further. Because bacterial 
mRNA does not need to be processed and is also physically accessible to 
ribosomes while it is being made, ribosomes will typically attach to the 
free end of a bacterial mRNA molecule and start translating it even before 
the transcription of that RNA is complete; these ribosomes follow closely 
behind the RNA polymerase as it moves along DNA. 
Inhibitors of Prokaryotic Protein Synthesis Are Used as 
Antibiotics
The ability to translate mRNAs accurately into proteins is a fundamental 
feature of all life on Earth. Although the ribosome and other molecules 
that carry out this complex task are very similar among organisms, we 
(B)
100 nm
3′
stop 
codon
UAG
AUG
start
codon
5′
mRNA
100 nm
growing
polypeptide
chain
(A)
AA
AA
A
Figure 7–39 Proteins are synthesized on 
polyribosomes. (A) Schematic drawing 
showing how a series of ribosomes can 
simultaneously translate the same mRNA 
molecule (Movie 7.10). (B) Electron 
micrograph of a polyribosome in the cytosol 
of a eukaryotic cell. (B, courtesy of John 
Heuser.) 
From RNA to Protein         
