253
We will see in the next chapter that cells have the ability to change the 
concentrations of most of their proteins according to their needs. In prin-
ciple, all of the steps in Figure 7–42 can be regulated by the cell—and 
many of them, in fact, are. However, as we will see in the next chapter, 
the initiation of transcription is the most common point for a cell to regu-
late the expression of its genes.
Transcription and translation are universal processes that lie at the heart 
of life. However, when scientists came to consider how the flow of infor-
mation from DNA to protein might have originated, they came to some 
unexpected conclusions.
RNA and the Origins of Life
The central dogma—that DNA makes RNA that makes protein—presented 
evolutionary biologists with a knotty puzzle: if nucleic acids are required 
to direct the synthesis of proteins, and proteins are required to synthe-
size nucleic acids, how could this system of interdependent components 
have arisen? One view is that an RNA world existed on Earth before 
cells containing DNA and proteins appeared. According to this hypoth-
esis, RNA—which today serves largely as an intermediate between genes 
and proteins—both stored genetic information and catalyzed chemical 
reactions in primitive cells. Only later in evolutionary time did DNA take 
over as the genetic material and proteins become the major catalysts 
and structural components of cells (Figure 7–44). If this idea is correct, 
then the transition out of the RNA world was never completed; as we 
have seen, RNA still catalyzes several fundamental reactions in modern 
cells. These RNA catalysts—or ribozymes—including those that operate 
in the ribosome and in the RNA-splicing machinery, can thus be viewed 
as molecular fossils of an earlier world.
Life Requires Autocatalysis 
The origin of life requires molecules that possess, if only to a small extent, 
one crucial property: the ability to catalyze reactions that lead—directly or 
indirectly—to the production of more molecules like themselves. Catalysts 
with this self-producing property, once they had arisen by chance, would 
divert raw materials from the production of other substances to make 
more of themselves. In this way, one can envisage the gradual develop-
ment of an increasingly complex chemical system of organic monomers 
and polymers that function together to generate more molecules of the 
same types, fueled by a supply of simple raw materials in the primitive 
environment on Earth. Such an autocatalytic system would have many 
of the properties we think of as characteristic of living matter: the sys-
tem would contain a far-from-random selection of interacting molecules; 
it would tend to reproduce itself; it would compete with other systems 
dependent on the same raw materials; and, if deprived of its raw mat-
erials or maintained at a temperature that upset the balance of reaction 
rates, it would decay toward chemical equilibrium and “die.”
Figure 7–43 Many proteins require 
various modifications to become fully 
functional. To be useful to the cell, a 
completed polypeptide must fold correctly 
into its three-dimensional conformation 
and then bind any required cofactors (red) 
and protein partners—all via noncovalent 
bonding. Many proteins also require one 
or more covalent modifications to become 
active—or to be recruited to specific 
membranes or organelles (not shown). 
Although phosphorylation and glycosylation 
are the most common, more than 100 types 
of covalent modifications of proteins are 
known. 
Figure 7–44 An RNA world may have 
existed before modern cells with DNA 
and proteins evolved.
RNA and the Origins of Life         
nascent polypeptide chain
FOLDING AND
COFACTOR BINDING,
DEPENDENT ON
NONCOVALENT 
INTERACTIONS
COVALENT MODIFICATION
BY, FOR EXAMPLE,
PHOSPHORYLATION
NONCOVALENT BINDING
TO OTHER PROTEIN
SUBUNIT
mature functional protein
P
P
solar
system
formed
RNA
WORLD
ﬁrst cells
with DNA
ﬁrst
mammals
Big Bang
present
10
14
5
time (billions of years ago)
