227
Like the DNA polymerase that carries out DNA replication (discussed 
in Chapter 6), RNA polymerases catalyze the formation of the phos-
phodiester bonds that link the nucleotides together and form the 
sugar–phosphate backbone of the RNA chain (see Figure 7–3). The RNA 
polymerase moves stepwise along the DNA, unwinding the DNA helix 
just ahead to expose a new region of the template strand for comple-
mentary base-pairing. In this way, the growing RNA chain is extended by 
one nucleotide at a time in the 5′-to-3′ direction (Figure 7–7). The incom-
ing ribonucleoside triphosphates (ATP, CTP, UTP, and GTP) provide the 
energy needed to drive the reaction forward (see Figure 6–11).
The almost immediate release of the RNA strand from the DNA as it is syn-
thesized means that many RNA copies can be made from the same gene 
in a relatively short time; the synthesis of the next RNA is usually started 
before the first RNA has been completed (Figure 7–8). A medium-sized 
gene—say, 1500 nucleotide pairs—requires approximately 50 seconds for 
a molecule of RNA polymerase to transcribe it (Movie 7.2). At any given 
time, there could be dozens of polymerases speeding along this single 
stretch of DNA, hard on one another’s heels, allowing more than 1000 
transcripts to be synthesized in an hour. For most genes, however, the 
amount of transcription is much less than this.
Although RNA polymerase catalyzes essentially the same chemical reac-
tion as DNA polymerase, there are some important differences between 
the two enzymes. First, and most obviously, RNA polymerase uses ribo-
nucleoside for phosphates as substrates, so it catalyzes the linkage of 
ribonucleotides, not deoxyribonucleotides. Second, unlike the DNA 
polymerase involved in DNA replication, RNA polymerases can start an 
RNA chain without a primer. This difference likely evolved because tran-
scription need not be as accurate as DNA replication; unlike DNA, RNA is 
not used as the permanent storage form of genetic information in cells, 
so mistakes in RNA transcripts have relatively minor consequences for a 
cell. RNA polymerases make about one mistake for every 104 nucleotides 
copied into RNA, whereas DNA polymerase makes only one mistake for 
every 107 nucleotides copied.
Cells Produce Various Types of RNA 
The vast majority of genes carried in a cell’s DNA specify the amino acid 
sequences of proteins. The RNA molecules encoded by these genes—which 
RNA polymerase
5′
5′
3′
5′
3′
incoming
ribonucleoside
triphosphates
DNA template
strand
ribonucleoside
triphosphate
tunnel
active site of
polymerase
newly synthesized
RNA transcript
Figure 7–7 DNA is transcribed into RNA 
by the enzyme RNA polymerase. RNA 
polymerase (pale blue) moves stepwise 
along the DNA, unwinding the DNA helix in 
front of it. As it progresses, the polymerase 
adds ribonucleotides one by one to the 
RNA chain, using an exposed DNA strand as 
a template. The resulting RNA transcript is 
thus single-stranded and complementary to 
this template strand (see Figure 7–6). As the 
polymerase moves along the DNA template 
(in the 3′-to-5′ direction), it displaces the 
newly formed RNA, allowing the two strands 
of DNA behind the polymerase to rewind. 
A short region of hybrid DNA/RNA helix 
(approximately nine nucleotides in length) 
therefore forms only transiently, causing a 
“window” of DNA/RNA helix to move along 
the DNA with the polymerase (Movie 7.2).
1 μm
Figure 7–8 Transcription can be visualized 
in the electron microscope. The 
micrograph shows many molecules of RNA 
polymerase simultaneously transcribing two 
adjacent ribosomal genes on a single DNA 
molecule. Molecules of RNA polymerase 
are barely visible as a series of tiny dots 
along the spine of the DNA molecule; 
each polymerase has an RNA transcript (a 
short, fine thread) radiating from it. The 
RNA molecules being transcribed from the 
two ribosomal genes—ribosomal RNAs 
(rRNAs)—are not translated into protein, but 
are instead used directly as components of 
ribosomes, macromolecular machines made 
of RNA and protein. The large particles that 
can be seen at the free, 5′ end of each rRNA 
transcript are believed to be ribosomal 
proteins that have assembled on the ends 
of the growing transcripts. (Courtesy of 
Ulrich Scheer.) 
From DNA to RNA         
Question 7–2
In the electron micrograph in Figure 
7–8, are the RNA polymerase 
molecules moving from right to left 
or from left to right? Why are the 
RNA transcripts so much shorter 
than the DNA segments (genes) that 
encode them?
