237
proteins that bind to mRNAs that have been appropriately spliced (Figure 
7–23). The entire set of bound proteins, rather than any single protein, 
ultimately determines whether an mRNA molecule will leave the nucleus. 
The “waste RNAs” that remain behind in the nucleus are degraded there, 
and their nucleotide building blocks are reused for transcription.
mRNA Molecules Are Eventually Degraded in the Cytosol
Because a single mRNA molecule can be translated into protein many 
times (see Figure 7–2), the length of time that a mature mRNA mole-
cule persists in the cell affects the amount of protein it produces. Each 
mRNA molecule is eventually degraded into nucleotides by ribonucleases 
(RNAses) present in the cytosol, but the lifetimes of mRNA molecules dif-
fer considerably—depending on the nucleotide sequence of the mRNA 
and the type of cell. In bacteria, most mRNAs are degraded rapidly, hav-
ing a typical lifetime of about 3 minutes. The mRNAs in eukaryotic cells 
usually persist longer: some, such as those encoding β-globin, have life-
times of more than 10 hours, whereas others have lifetimes of less than 
30 minutes. 
These different lifetimes are in part controlled by nucleotide sequences 
in the mRNA itself, most often in the portion of RNA called the 3′ untrans-
lated region, which lies between the 3′ end of the coding sequence and 
the poly-A tail. The different lifetimes of mRNAs help the cell control the 
amount of each protein that it synthesizes. In general, proteins made in 
large amounts, such as β-globin, are translated from mRNAs that have 
long lifetimes, whereas proteins made in smaller amounts, or whose lev-
els must change rapidly in response to signals, are typically synthesized 
from short-lived mRNAs. 
The Earliest Cells May Have Had Introns in Their Genes
The process of transcription is universal: all cells use RNA polymerase 
and complementary base-pairing to synthesize RNA from DNA. Indeed, 
bacterial and eukaryotic RNA polymerases are almost identical in overall 
structure and clearly evolved from a shared ancestral polymerase. It may 
therefore seem puzzling that the resulting RNA transcripts are handled so 
differently in eukaryotes and in prokaryotes (Figure 7–24). In particular, 
RNA splicing seems to mark a fundamental difference between those two 
types of cells. But how did this dramatic difference arise?
As we have seen, RNA splicing provides eukaryotes with the ability to 
produce a variety of proteins from a single gene. It also allows them 
to evolve new genes by mixing-and-matching exons from preexisting 
genes, as we discuss in Chapter 9. However, these advantages come with 
a cost: the cell has to maintain a larger genome and has to discard a 
poly-A–binding
protein
NUCLEUS
CYTOSOL
AA
A
A
A
A
 
5′ cap
TRANSLATION
PROTEIN
EXCHANGE
exon
junction
complex
nuclear pore
complex
initiation factors
for protein synthesis
cap-binding
protein
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
nuclear
envelope
Figure 7–23 A specialized set of RNA-
binding proteins signals that a mature 
mRNA is ready for export to the cytosol. 
As indicated on the left, the cap and 
poly-A tail of a mature mRNA molecule 
are “marked” by proteins that recognize 
these modifications. In addition, a group of 
proteins called the exon junction complex 
is deposited on the pre-mRNA after each 
successful splice has occurred. Once the 
mRNA is deemed “export ready,” a nuclear 
transport receptor (discussed in Chapter 
15) associates with the mRNA and guides it 
through the nuclear pore. In the cytosol, the 
mRNA can shed some of these proteins and 
bind new ones, which, along with poly-A–
binding protein, act as initiation factors for 
protein synthesis, as we discuss later.
From DNA to RNA         
