247
to help fold and stabilize the RNA core, while permitting the changes in 
rRNA conformation that are necessary for this RNA to catalyze efficient 
protein synthesis.
Not only are the three tRNA-binding sites (the A, P, and E sites) on the 
ribosome formed primarily by the rRNAs, but the catalytic site for peptide 
bond formation is formed by the 23S rRNA of the large subunit; the near-
est ribosomal protein is located too far away to make contact with the 
incoming charged tRNA or with the growing polypeptide chain. The cata-
lytic site in this rRNA—a peptidyl transferase—is similar in many respects 
to that found in some protein enzymes: it is a highly structured pocket 
that precisely orients the two reactants—the elongating polypeptide and 
the charged tRNA—thereby greatly increasing the probability of a produc-
tive reaction.
RNA molecules that possess catalytic activity are called ribozymes. Later, 
in the final section of this chapter, we will consider other ribozymes and 
discuss what the existence of RNA-based catalysis might mean for the 
early evolution of life on Earth. Here we need only note that there is good 
reason to suspect that RNA rather than protein molecules served as the 
first catalysts for living cells. If so, the ribosome, with its catalytic RNA 
core, could be viewed as a relic of an earlier time in life’s history, when 
cells were run almost entirely by ribozymes.
Specific Codons in mRNA Signal the Ribosome Where to 
Start and to Stop Protein Synthesis
In the test tube, ribosomes can be forced to translate any RNA molecule 
(see How We Know, pp. 240–241). In a cell, however, a specific start sig-
nal is required to initiate translation. The site at which protein synthesis 
begins on an mRNA is crucial, because it sets the reading frame for the 
whole length of the message. An error of one nucleotide either way at 
this stage will cause every subsequent codon in the mRNA to be misread, 
resulting in a nonfunctional protein with a garbled sequence of amino 
acids (see Figure 7–26). And the rate of initiation determines the rate at 
which the protein is synthesized from the mRNA.
The translation of an mRNA begins with the codon AUG, and a special 
charged tRNA is required to initiate translation. This initiator tRNA 
always carries the amino acid methionine (or a modified form of methio-
nine, formyl-methionine, in bacteria). Thus newly made proteins all have 
methionine as the first amino acid at their N-terminal end, the end of a 
protein that is synthesized first. This methionine is usually removed later 
by a specific protease.
In eukaryotes, an initiator tRNA, charged with methionine, is first loaded 
into the P site of the small ribosomal subunit, along with additional pro-
teins called translation initiation factors (Figure 7–36). The initiator 
tRNA is distinct from the tRNA that normally carries methionine. Of all 
the tRNAs in the cell, only a charged initiator tRNA molecule is capable of 
binding tightly to the P site in the absence of the large ribosomal subunit. 
Next, the small ribosomal subunit loaded with the initiator tRNA binds to 
Figure 7–36 Initiation of protein synthesis in eukaryotes requires 
translation initiation factors and a special initiator tRNA. Although 
not shown here, efficient translation initiation also requires additional 
proteins that are bound at the 5′ cap and poly-A tail of the mRNA 
(see Figure 7–23). In this way, the translation apparatus can ascertain 
that both ends of the mRNA are intact before initiating translation. 
Following initiation, the protein is elongated by the reactions outlined 
in Figure 7–34.
From RNA to Protein         
Question 7–5
A sequence of nucleotides in a DNA 
strand—5′-TTAACGGCTTTTTTC-3′—
was used as a template to 
synthesize an mRNA that was then 
translated into protein. Predict 
the C-terminal amino acid and 
the N-terminal amino acid of the 
resulting polypeptide. Assume that 
the mRNA is translated without the 
need for a start codon.
P
5′
3′
5′
3′
5′
3′
mRNA
AUG
aa
initiator tRNA
small ribosomal subunit
with translation initiation
factors bound
SMALL RIBOSOMAL
SUBUNIT, WITH BOUND
INITIATOR tRNA,
MOVES ALONG 
mRNA SEARCHING 
FOR FIRST AUG
TRANSLATION
INITIATION
FACTORS 
DISSOCIATE
LARGE
RIBOSOMAL
SUBUNIT
BINDS
CHARGED
tRNA BINDS
TO A SITE
(step 1)
FIRST PEPTIDE
BOND FORMS 
(step 2)
AUG
mRNA BINDING
P
P
AUG
E
A
Met
Met
Met
5′
3′
P
AUG
E
A
Met aa
5′
3′
P
AUG
E
A
Met
aa
Met
translation initiation
factors
