228	
Chapter 7     From DNA to Protein: How Cells Read the Genome
ultimately direct the synthesis of proteins—are called messenger RNAs 
(mRNAs). In eukaryotes, each mRNA typically carries information tran-
scribed from just one gene, which codes for a single protein; in bacteria, a 
set of adjacent genes is often transcribed as a single mRNA, which there-
fore carries the information for several different proteins.
The final product of other genes, however, is the RNA itself. As we see 
later, these nonmessenger RNAs, like proteins, have various roles, serv-
ing as regulatory, structural, and catalytic components of cells. They play 
key parts, for example, in translating the genetic message into protein: 
ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) form the structural and catalytic core of the ribos-
omes, which translate mRNAs into protein, and transfer RNAs (tRNAs) act 
as adaptors that select specific amino acids and hold them in place on a 
ribosome for their incorporation into protein. Other small RNAs, called 
microRNAs (miRNAs), serve as key regulators of eukaryotic gene expres-
sion, as we discuss in Chapter 8. The most common types of RNA are 
summarized in Table 7–1.
In the broadest sense, the term gene expression refers to the process 
by which the information encoded in a DNA sequence is translated into 
a product that has some effect on a cell or organism. In cases where 
the final product of the gene is a protein, gene expression includes both 
transcription and translation. When an RNA molecule is the gene’s final 
product, however, gene expression does not require translation. 
Signals in DNA Tell RNA Polymerase Where to Start and 
Finish Transcription
The initiation of transcription is an especially critical process because it 
is the main point at which the cell selects which proteins or RNAs are to 
be produced. To begin transcription, RNA polymerase must be able to 
recognize the start of a gene and bind firmly to the DNA at this site. The 
way in which RNA polymerases recognize the transcription start site of a 
gene differs somewhat between bacteria and eukaryotes. Because the 
situation in bacteria is simpler, we describe it first. 
When an RNA polymerase collides randomly with a DNA molecule, the 
enzyme sticks weakly to the double helix and then slides rapidly along its 
length. RNA polymerase latches on tightly only after it has encountered 
a gene region called a promoter, which contains a specific sequence 
of nucleotides that lies immediately upstream of the starting point for 
RNA synthesis. Once bound tightly to this sequence, the RNA polymerase 
opens up the double helix immediately in front of the promoter to expose 
the nucleotides on each strand of a short stretch of DNA. One of the two 
exposed DNA strands then acts as a template for complementary base-
pairing with incoming ribonucleoside triphosphates, two of which are 
Table 7–1 Types of RNA Produced in Cells
Type of RNA
Function
messenger RNAs (mRNAs)
code for proteins
ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs)
form the core of the ribosome’s structure and 
catalyze protein synthesis
microRNAs (miRNAs)
regulate gene expression
transfer RNAs (tRNAs)
serve as adaptors between mRNA and amino acids 
during protein synthesis
other noncoding RNAs
used in RNA splicing, gene regulation, telomere 
maintenance, and many other processes
