232	
Chapter 7     From DNA to Protein: How Cells Read the Genome
segment of DNA double helix composed primarily of T and A nucleotides; 
because of its composition, this part of the promoter is known as the TATA 
box. Upon binding to DNA, TFIID causes a dramatic local distortion in the 
DNA double helix (Figure 7–13), which helps to serve as a landmark for 
the subsequent assembly of other proteins at the promoter. The TATA box 
is a key component of many promoters used by RNA polymerase II, and 
it is typically located 25 nucleotides upstream from the transcription start 
site. Once TFIID has bound to the TATA box, the other factors assemble, 
along with RNA polymerase II, to form a complete transcription initiation 
complex. Although Figure 7–12 shows the general transcription factors 
piling onto the promoter in a certain order, the actual order of assembly 
probably differs from one promoter to the next.
After RNA polymerase II has been positioned on the promoter, it must be 
released from the complex of general transcription factors to begin its task 
of making an RNA molecule. A key step in liberating the RNA polymer-
ase is the addition of phosphate groups to its “tail” (see Figure 7–12E). 
This liberation is initiated by the general transcription factor TFIIH, which 
contains a protein kinase as one of its subunits. Once transcription has 
begun, most of the general transcription factors dissociate from the DNA 
and then are available to initiate another round of transcription with a 
new RNA polymerase molecule. When RNA polymerase II finishes tran-
scribing a gene, it too is released from the DNA; the phosphates on its 
tail are stripped off by protein phosphatases, and the polymerase is then 
ready to find a new promoter. Only the dephosphorylated form of RNA 
polymerase II can initiate RNA synthesis.
Eukaryotic mRNAs Are Processed in the Nucleus
Although the templating principle by which DNA is transcribed into RNA 
is the same in all organisms, the way in which the RNA transcripts are 
handled before they can be used by the cell to make protein differs greatly 
between bacteria and eukaryotes. Bacterial DNA lies directly exposed 
to the cytoplasm, which contains the ribosomes on which protein syn-
thesis takes place. As an mRNA molecule in a bacterium starts to be 
synthesized, ribosomes immediately attach to the free 5′ end of the RNA 
transcript and begin translating it into protein. 
In eukaryotic cells, by contrast, DNA is enclosed within the nucleus. 
Transcription takes place in the nucleus, but protein synthesis takes 
place on ribosomes in the cytoplasm. So, before a eukaryotic mRNA 
can be translated into protein, it must be transported out of the nucleus 
through small pores in the nuclear envelope (Figure 7–14). Before it can 
be exported to the cytosol, however, a eukaryotic RNA must go through 
several RNA processing steps, which include capping, splicing, and poly-
adenylation, as we discuss shortly. These steps take place as the RNA is 
being synthesized. The enzymes responsible for RNA processing ride on 
the phosphorylated tail of eukaryotic RNA polymerase II as it synthesizes 
an RNA molecule (see Figure 7–12), and they process the transcript as it 
emerges from the polymerase (Figure 7–15).
A A
A
A
T
A
T
5′
3′
3′
5′
N
C
G
Figure 7–13 TATA-binding protein (TBP) binds to the TATA box 
(indicated by letters) and bends the DNA double helix. The unique 
distortion of DNA caused by TBP, which is a subunit of TFIID (see 
Figure 7–12), helps attract the other general transcription factors. 
TBP is a single polypeptide chain that is folded into two very similar 
domains (blue and green). The protein sits atop the DNA double helix 
like a saddle on a bucking horse (Movie 7.4). (Adapted from J.L. Kim 
et al., Nature 365:520–527, 1993. With permission from Macmillan 
Publishers Ltd.)
Figure 7–14 Before they can be 
translated, mRNA molecules made in 
the nucleus must be exported to the 
cytosol via pores in the nuclear envelope 
(red arrows). Shown here is a section of a 
liver cell nucleus. The nucleolus is where 
ribosomal RNAs are synthesized and 
combined with proteins to form ribosomes, 
which are then exported to the cytoplasm. 
(From D.W. Fawcett, A Textbook of 
Histology, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 
1986. With permission from Elsevier.) 
nucleus
nucleolus
cytosol
5 μm
nuclear
envelope
